
Bitter orange
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For the fruit known as the "Chinese bitter orange", see Trifoliate orange.
Citrus aurantium
Citrus aurantium.jpg
Scientific classification
Kingdom:	Plantae
(unranked):	Angiosperms
(unranked):	Eudicots
(unranked):	Rosids
Order:	Sapindales
Family:	Rutaceae
Genus:	Citrus
Species:	C. × aurantium
Binomial name
Citrus × aurantium
L., 1753[1]
Synonyms[2]
Aurantium × acre Mill.
Aurantium × bigarella Poit. & Turpin
Aurantium × corniculatum Mill.
Aurantium × corniculatum Poit. & Turpin
Aurantium × coronatum Poit. & Turpin
Aurantium × distortum Mill.
Aurantium × humile Mill.
Aurantium × myrtifolium Descourt.
Aurantium × orientale Mill.
Aurantium × silvestre Pritz.
Aurantium × sinense (L.) Mill.
Aurantium × variegatum Barb.Rodr.
Aurantium × vulgare (Risso) M. Gómez
Citrus bigaradia Risso & Poit.
Citrus humilis (Mill.) Poir.
Citrus × amara Link
Citrus × aurata Risso
Citrus × benikoji Yu.Tanaka
Citrus × bigaradia Loisel.
Citrus × calot Lag.
Citrus × canaliculata Yu.Tanaka
Citrus × changshan-huyou Y.B.Chang
Citrus × communis Poit. & Turpin
Citrus × dulcimedulla Pritz.
Citrus × dulcis Pers.
Citrus × florida Salisb.
Citrus × funadoko Yu.Tanaka
Citrus × fusca Lour.
Citrus × glaberrima Yu.Tanaka
Citrus × humilis (Mill.) Poir.
Citrus × intermedia Yu.Tanaka
Citrus × iwaikan Yu.Tanaka
Citrus × iyo Yu.Tanaka nom. inval.
Citrus × karna Raf.
Citrus × keraji Yu.Tanaka nom. inval.
Citrus × kotokan Hayata
Citrus × medioglobosa Yu.Tanaka
Citrus × mitsuharu Yu.Tanaka
Citrus × myrtifolia (Ker Gawl.) Raf.
Citrus × natsudaidai (Yu.Tanaka) Hayata
Citrus × omikanto Yu.Tanaka
Citrus × pseudogulgul Shirai
Citrus × reshni (Engl.) Yu.Tanaka
Citrus × rokugatsu Yu.Tanaka
Citrus × rumphii Risso
Citrus × sinograndis Yu.Tanaka nom. inval.
Citrus × subcompressa (Tanaka) Yu.Tanaka
Citrus × sulcata Yu.Tanaka nom. inval.
Citrus × taiwanica Yu.Tanaka & Shimada
Citrus × tangelo J.W.Ingram & H.E.Moore
Citrus × tengu Yu.Tanaka nom. inval.
Citrus × tosa-asahi Yu.Tanaka
Citrus × truncata Yu.Tanaka
Citrus × vulgaris Risso
Citrus × yatsushiro Yu.Tanaka
Citrus × yuge-hyokan Yu.Tanaka
Bitter orange, Seville orange, sour orange, bigarade orange, or marmalade orange refers to a citrus tree (Citrus × aurantium) and its fruit. It is native to southeast Asia, and has been spread by humans to many parts of the world.[3] Wild trees are found near small streams in generally secluded and wooded parts of Florida and The Bahamas after it was introduced to the area from Spain.[3]

It is a hybrid between Citrus maxima (pomelo) and Citrus reticulata (mandarin).[4] Many varieties of bitter orange are used for their essential oil, and are found in perfume, used as a flavoring or as a solvent. The Seville orange variety is used in the production of marmalade.

Bitter orange is also employed in herbal medicine as a stimulant and appetite suppressant, due to its active ingredient, synephrine.[5][6] Bitter orange supplements have been linked to a number of serious side effects and deaths, and consumer groups advocate that people avoid using the fruit medically.[7]

Contents  [hide] 
1	Varieties
2	Uses
2.1	Cooking
2.2	Herbal stimulant
3	References
4	External links
Varieties[edit]
See also: Citrus taxonomy § Oranges
Citrus × aurantium subsp. amara is a spiny evergreen tree native to southern Vietnam, but widely cultivated. It is used as grafting stock for citrus trees, in marmalade, and in liqueur such as triple sec, Grand Marnier and Curaçao. It is also cultivated for the essential oil expressed from the fruit, and for neroli oil and orange flower water, which are distilled from the flowers.
Citrus × aurantium var. myrtifolia is sometimes considered a separate species, Citrus myrtifolia, the myrtle-leaved orange. A selection known as Chinotto is used for the namesake Italian soda beverage.[8]
Citrus × aurantium var. daidai, Daidai, is used in Chinese medicine and Japanese New Year celebrations. The aromatic flowers are added to tea.[3]
Citrus bergamia, the Bergamot orange, is probably a bitter orange and limetta hybrid; it is cultivated in Italy for the production of bergamot oil, a component of many brands of perfume and tea, especially Earl Grey tea.[citation needed]
Uses[edit]
This orange is used as a rootstock in groves of sweet orange.[3] The fruit and leaves make lather and can be used as soap.[3] The hard white or light yellow wood is used in woodworking and made into baseball bats in Cuba.[3] Seville orange (or bigarade) is a widely known, particularly tart orange which is now grown throughout the Mediterranean region. It has a thick, dimpled skin, and is prized for making marmalade, being higher in pectin than the sweet orange, and therefore giving a better set and a higher yield. It is also used in compotes and for orange-flavored liqueurs. Once a year, oranges of this variety are collected from trees in Seville and shipped to Britain to be used in marmalade.[9] However, the fruit is rarely consumed locally in Andalusia.[10]

Cooking[edit]

The bitter orange, whole and sectioned.
The unripe fruit, called narthangai, is commonly used in Southern Indian cuisine, especially in Tamil cuisine. It is pickled by cutting it into spirals and stuffing it with salt. The pickle is usually consumed with yoghurt rice thayir sadam. The fresh fruit is also used frequently in pachadis. The juice from the ripe fruit is also used as a marinade for meat in Nicaraguan, Cuban, Dominican and Haitian cooking, as it was in Peruvian Ceviche until the 1960s. The peel can be used in the production of bitters. In Yucatán (Mexico), it is a main ingredient of the cochinita pibil.

The Belgian Witbier (white beer) is made from wheat beer spiced with the peel of the bitter orange. The Finnish and Swedish use bitter orange peel in gingerbread (pepparkakor), some Christmas bread and in mämmi. It is also used in the Nordic mulled wine glögg. In Greece and Cyprus, the nerántzi or kitrómilon, respectively, is one of the most prized fruits used for spoon sweets, and the C. aurantium tree (nerantziá or kitromiliá) is a popular ornamental tree. In Albania as well, "nerënxa" or "portokalli i hidhur" is used commonly in spoon sweets. Throughout Iran (commonly known as narenj), the juice is popularly used as a salad dressing, souring agent in stews and pickles or as a marinade. The blossoms are collected fresh to make a prized sweet-smelling aromatic jam ("Bitter orange blossom jam" Morabba Bahar-Narendj), or added to brewing tea. In Turkey, juice of the ripe fruits can be used as salad dressing, especially in Çukurova region.

Herbal stimulant[edit]

Bitter oranges
The extract of bitter orange (and bitter orange peel) has been marketed as dietary supplement purported to act as a weight-loss aid and appetite suppressant. Bitter orange contains the tyramine metabolites N-methyltyramine, octopamine and synephrine,[11] substances similar to epinephrine, which act on the α1 adrenergic receptor to constrict blood vessels and increase blood pressure and heart rate.[12][13] p-Synephrine alone or in combination with caffeine or other substances has been shown to modestly increase weight loss in several low-quality clinical trials.[14]

Following bans on the herbal stimulant ephedra in the U.S., Canada, and elsewhere, bitter orange has been substituted into "ephedra-free" herbal weight-loss products by dietary supplement manufacturers.[15] Like most dietary supplement ingredients, bitter orange has not undergone formal safety testing, but it is believed to cause the same spectrum of adverse events as ephedra.[16] Case reports have linked bitter orange supplements to strokes,[17][18] angina,[11] and ischemic colitis.[19] The U.S. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health found that "there is currently little evidence that bitter orange is safer to use than ephedra."[6] Bitter orange may have serious drug interactions with drugs such as statins in a similar way to grapefruit.[20]

Following an incident in which a healthy young man suffered a myocardial infarction (heart attack) linked to bitter orange, a case study found that dietary supplement manufacturers had replaced ephedra with its analogs from bitter orange.[21]

References[edit]
Jump up ^ "Citrus × aurantium L.". Germplasm Resources Information Network. United States Department of Agriculture. 1999-12-17. Retrieved 2010-01-05.
Jump up ^ "The Plant List: A Working List of All Plant Species". Retrieved 29 September 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e f C. aurantium. Purdue Horticulture.
Jump up ^ "Plant Profile for Citrus ×aurantium L. (pro sp.), http://plants.usda.gov/java/profile?symbol=CIAU8
Jump up ^ Sharpe PA, Granner ML, Conway JM, Ainsworth BE, Dobre M (December 2006). "Availability of weight-loss supplements: Results of an audit of retail outlets in a southeastern city". Journal of the American Dietetic Association. 106 (12): 2045–51. doi:10.1016/j.jada.2006.09.014. PMID 17126636.
^ Jump up to: a b "Bitter Orange". National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. April 2008. Retrieved 2008-11-03.
Jump up ^ "Dangerous Supplements: Twelve Supplements You Should Avoid". Consumer Reports Magazine. September 2010.
Jump up ^ Roger M. Grace. "Cadbury Schweppes Reigns Supreme Over Orange Soda Market". metnews.com.
Jump up ^ Campaña de recogida de la naranja amarga.[permanent dead link] sevilla.org.
Jump up ^ Apenas se aprovechará la naranja que se recoja en la capital este año. 20minutos.es.
^ Jump up to: a b Gange CA, Madias C, Felix-Getzik EM, Weintraub AR, Estes NA (April 2006). "Variant angina associated with bitter orange in a dietary supplement". Mayo Clinic Proceedings. 81 (4): 545–8. doi:10.4065/81.4.545. PMID 16610576.
Jump up ^ Bui LT, Nguyen DT, Ambrose PJ (January 2006). "Blood pressure and heart rate effects following a single dose of bitter orange". The Annals of Pharmacotherapy. 40 (1): 53–7. doi:10.1345/aph.1G488. PMID 16317106.
Jump up ^ Hess AM, Sullivan DL (March 2005). "Potential for toxicity with use of bitter orange extract and guarana for weight loss". The Annals of pharmacotherapy. 39 (3): 574–5. doi:10.1345/aph.1E249. PMID 15657116.
Jump up ^ Stohs SJ, Preuss HG, Shara M (August 2012). "A review of the human clinical studies involving Citrus aurantium (bitter orange) extract and its primary protoalkaloid p-synephrine.". Int J Med Sci. 9 (7): 527–538. doi:10.7150/ijms.4446. PMC 3444973Freely accessible. PMID 22991491.
Jump up ^ Duenwald, Mary (2005-10-11). "Bitter Orange Under Scrutiny as New Ephedra". New York Times. Retrieved 2008-11-03.
Jump up ^ Jordan S, Murty M, Pilon K (October 2004). "Products containing bitter orange or synephrine: suspected cardiovascular adverse reactions" (pdf). Canadian Medical Association Journal. 171 (8): 993–4. PMID 15497209.
Jump up ^ Bouchard NC, Howland MA, Greller HA, Hoffman RS, Nelson LS (April 2005). "Ischemic stroke associated with use of an ephedra-free dietary supplement containing synephrine". Mayo Clinic Proceedings. 80 (4): 541–5. doi:10.4065/80.4.541. PMID 15819293.
Jump up ^ Holmes RO, Tavee J (July 2008). "Vasospasm and stroke attributable to ephedra-free xenadrine: case report". Military Medicine. 173 (7): 708–10. PMID 18700609.
Jump up ^ Sultan S, Spector J, Mitchell RM (December 2006). "Ischemic colitis associated with use of a bitter orange-containing dietary weight-loss supplement". Mayo Clinic Proceedings. 81 (12): 1630–1. doi:10.4065/81.12.1630. PMID 17165643.
Jump up ^ Mayo clinic: article on interference between grapefruit and medication
Jump up ^ Thomas JE, Munir JA, McIntyre PZ, Ferguson MA (2009). "STEMI in a 24-Year-Old Man after Use of a Synephrine-Containing Dietary Supplement: A Case Report and Review of the Literature". Tex Heart Inst J. 36 (6): 586–90. PMC 2801940Freely accessible. PMID 20069086.
External links[edit]
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Citrus aurantium.
 Data related to Citrus aurantium at Wikispecies
Bitter Orange: Information from the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health
Bitter Orange List of Chemicals (Dr. Duke's Databases)
[hide] v t e
Citrus
True species	
Byeonggyul Citron Indian wild orange Kumquat Mandarin Mangshanyegan Papeda Pomelo Clymenia Australian and Papuan wild limes
Major hybrids	
Grapefruit Lemon Lime Orange
True and hybrid
cultivars	
Alemow Amanatsu Bergamot orange Bizzaria Bitter orange Blood lime Blood orange Buddha's hand Cam sành Cara cara navel Cherry orange Citrange Citrumelo Clementine Daidai Dekopon Fairchild tangerine Florentine citron Hassaku orange Hebesu Hyuganatsu Imperial lemon Iyokan Jabara Jaffa orange Kabbad Kabosu Kaffir lime Kakadu lime Kalpi Key lime Khasi papeda Kinnow Kishumikan Kiyomi Komikan Laraha Lumia Mandelo Mandora Melanesian papeda Melogold Meyer lemon Murcott Myrtle-leaved orange tree Ōgonkan Orangelo/Chironja Oroblanco Palestinian sweet lime Persian lime Perrine lemon Pixie mandarin Ponderosa lemon Ponkan Rangpur Reikou Rhobs el Arsa Rough lemon Sanboken Satsuma mandarin Setoka Shangjuan Shonan Gold Sudachi Sweet lemon Sweet limetta Tangelo Tangerine Tangor Ugli fruit Valencia orange Variegated pink lemon Winged lime Xã Đoài orange Yuukou mandarin Yuzu
Non-hybrid citrons	
Balady citron Corsican citron Diamante citron Fingered citron Greek citron Moroccan citron Yemenite citron
Non-hybrid mandarin oranges	
Nanfengmiju Cleopatra mandarin Shīkwāsā
Non-hybrid papedas	
Ichang papeda Citrus halimii or Mountain "citron"
Non-hybrid pomelos	
Banpeiyu Dangyuja
Australian and Papuan citrus
(Microcitrus, Eromocitrus,
and Clymenia subgenera)	
Australian outback lime Australian round lime Brown River finger lime Desert lime Mount white lime (Microcitrus) New Guinea wild lime Russell River lime Clymenia
Kumquat/Fortunella hybrids
(×Citrofortunella)	
Calamondin Citrangequat Limequat Orangequat Procimequat Sunquat Yuzuquat
Related genera	
Citrus glauca Poncirus/Trifoliate orange Triphasia Brassii Grandifolia Trifolia
Drinks	
Chūhai Curaçao Grapefruit juice Lemonade Limeade Orange juice Yuja hwachae Yujacha
Products	
Calcium citrate Citric acid Lemonene Limonene Neroli Orange flower water Orange oil Succade Zest
Diseases	
Black spot CTV/Tristeza Exocortis Greening Mal secco Phytophthora citricola
Related topics	
The Citrus Industry Citrus production Citrus rootstock Citrus taxonomy Cold-hardy citrus Hesperidium Japanese citrus List of citrus fruits Mother Orange Tree Orangery University of California Citrus Experiment Station University of California, Riverside Citrus Variety Collection
Wikipedia book Book Category Category Category Production Commons page Commons
Categories: Dietary supplementsHerbal and fungal stimulantsMedicinal plantsOrangesPlants described in 1753
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikispecies
Languages
العربية
Asturianu
Azərbaycanca
Boarisch
བོད་ཡིག
Català
Cebuano
Chamoru
Corsu
Dansk
Deutsch
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Español
Esperanto
Euskara
فارسی
Français
Galego
Hornjoserbsce
Bahasa Indonesia
Italiano
עברית
Қазақша
Kiswahili
Коми
Kreyòl ayisyen
Кырык мары
Latina
Lietuvių
Magyar
Nederlands
नेपाली
日本語
Napulitano
Nordfriisk
Norsk bokmål
Norsk nynorsk
Occitan
پښتو
Перем Коми
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Русский
Sardu
Scots
Simple English
Suomi
Svenska
தமிழ்
తెలుగు
ไทย
Lea faka-Tonga
Türkçe
Удмурт
Українська
Tiếng Việt
Winaray
中文
Edit links
This page was last modified on 11 December 2016, at 19:54.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki